.\" Copyright (c) 2019-2020, Evgeniy Baskov. All rights reserved
.Dd August 27, 2020
.Dt NSST 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm nsst
.Nd not so simple terminal
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl option Ns Op Ns value
.Op Fl \-long-option Ns Op = Ns Aq value
.Oo
.Op Fl e
.Ar program
.Oo
.Aq args
.Ar ...
.Oc
.Oc
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Pp
Nsst is X11 and Wayland terminal emulator, built to be fast and small without sacrificing features.
.Sh OPTIONS
.Pp
Options can be specified either as command line arguments or in config file (without leading dashes) located at $XDG_CONFIG_HOME/nsst.conf, $XDG_CONFIG_HOME/nsst/nsst.conf, ~/.config/nsst.conf or ~/.config/nsst/nsst.conf by default.
Config file can be reloaded for all windows of already running terminal by sending SIGUSR1 to it or for a specific window using the appropriate shortcut.
Config file path can be specified with
.Fl \-config Ns = Ns Ar path
option.
If this option is set in config file this path would be used during config reloading.
Config reloading can be requested by sending SIGUSR1 to terminal.
.Pp
Options specified via command line arguments feature additional syntax. For boolean options
.Fl \-boolean-option
is equivalent to
.Fl \-boolean-option Ns = Ns Ar true .
and
.Fl \-no-boolean-option
is equivalent to
.Fl \-boolean-option Ns = Ns Ar false .
.Ar Yes , Ar y , Ar true
(case independent) values of boolean options can be used to enable option.
.Ar \&No , Ar n , Ar false
(case independent) can be used to disable it.
.Pp
All options with type
.Ar time
support 's', 'ms', 'us' and 'ns' units and decimal point for values.
If unit is not specified, 'us' is implied.
.Pp
Every option also accepts special value
.Ar default
that resets option to builtin default.
.Pp
The following are common options like terminal window appearance configuration:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl Fl help , Fl h
Print help message and exit
.It Fl Fl version , Fl v
Print version string and exit
.It Fl \-geometry Ns = Ns Ar geometry , Fl g Ns = Ns Ar geometry
Specify window geometry in pixels.
.Ar Geometry
is in format
.Bq = Ns
.Bo
.Aq width Ns
.Brq xX Ns
.Aq height Ns
.Bc Ns
.Bo Ns
.Brq +- Ns
.Aq xoffset Ns
.Brq +- Ns
.Aq yoffset Ns
.Bc
.It Fl \-char-geometry Ns = Ns Ar geometry , Fl g Ns = Ns Ar geometry
Specify window geometry in characters of the main font. Default is 80x24.
.Ar Geometry
is in format
.Bq = Ns
.Bo
.Aq width Ns
.Brq xX Ns
.Aq height Ns
.Bc Ns
.Bo Ns
.Brq +- Ns
.Aq xoffset Ns
.Brq +- Ns
.Aq yoffset Ns
.Bc
.It Fl \-color Ns N Ns = Ns Ar color
Set color number N from 256 color palette.
.Ar Color
should be in format #RGB or rgb:R/G/B, where R, G and B are one to four hex digits.
.It Fl \-allow-blinking Ns = Ns Ar bool
Allow blinking text and cursor
.It Fl \-alpha Ns = Ns Ar opacity
Background opacity, requires compositor to be running when used on X11.
Floating point value between 0 and 1.
.It Fl \-background Ns = Ns Ar color
Default background color
.Fl \-colorN
.It Fl \-backend Ns = Ns Ar backend
Select rendering backend. Supported backends: auto, x11, x11shm, x11xrender, wayland and waylandshm
.It Fl \-bell Ns = Ns Ar value
Bell volume index.
Value is one of off, low or high
.It Fl \-bell-high-volume Ns = Ns Ar volume
High volume value for DECSWBV, from 0 to 100
.It Fl \-bell-low-volume Ns = Ns Ar volume
Low volume value for DECSWBV, from 0 to 100
.It Fl \-blink-color Ns = Ns Ar color
Special color of blinking text
.Ar Color
format is same as for
.Fl \-colorN
.It Fl \-blink-time Ns = Ns Ar time
Text and cursor blink interval.
.It Fl \-bold-color Ns = Ns Ar color
Special color of bold text
.Ar Color
format is same as for
.Fl \-colorN
.It Fl \-cursor-background Ns = Ns Ar color
Default cursor background color.
.Ar Color
format is same as for
.Fl \-colorN
.It Fl \-cursor-foreground Ns = Ns Ar color
Default cursor foreground color.
.Ar Color
format is same as for
.Fl \-colorN
.It Fl \-cursor-shape Ns = Ns Ar shape
Shape of terminal cursor.
.Ar Shape
is one of block, blinking-block, bar, blinking-bar, underline, blinking-underline.
Default is block.
.It Fl \-cursor-hide-on-input Ns = Ns Ar bool
Hide cursor during keyboard input instead of showing it
.It Fl \-config Ns = Ns Ar path
Path of config file. Can be set to
.Qq /dev/null
to prevent config loading
.It Fl \-clone-config Ns = Ns Ar bool
Copy existing configuration from most recently opened window instead of loading it from file.
.It Fl \-cursor-width Ns = Ns Ar pixels
Width of lines that forms cursor
.It Fl \-daemon Ns = Ns Ar bool , Fl d
Enable daemon mode
.It Fl \-double-click-time Ns = Ns Ar time
Time between two consecutive mouse presses in which they will be considered a double click.
.It Fl \-select-scroll-time Ns = Ns Ar time
Time between subsequent scrolls during mouse selection.
.It Fl \-fixed Ns = Ns Ar bool
Don't allow to change window size, if supported
.It Fl \-font Ns = Ns Ar name , Fl f name
Comma-separated list of fontconfig font patterns
.It Fl \-font-gamma Ns = Ns Ar gamma
Factor of font sharpening
.It Fl \-font-size Ns = Ns Ar points
Font size in points
.It Fl \-font-size-step Ns = Ns Ar points
Font size step in points
.It Fl \-font-cache-size Ns = Ns Ar num
Number of glyphs to be cached per font
.It Fl \-font-spacing Ns = Ns Ar pixels
Additional horizontal spacing for individual cells
.It Fl \-force-dpi Ns = Ns Ar dpi
DPI value for fonts. Will be determined automatically if not specified explicitly.
.It Fl \-force-mouse-mod Ns = Ns Ar mods
Modifier to force mouse action
.It Fl \-force-scalable Ns = Ns Ar bool
Do not search for pixmap fonts
.It Fl \-force-wayland-csd Ns = Ns Ar bool
Force the use of client side decorations on Wayland.
.It Fl \-foreground Ns = Ns Ar color
Default foreground color.
.Ar Color
format is same as for
.Fl \-colorN
.It Fl \-fork Ns = Ns Ar bool
Fork in daemon mode, default is true
.It Fl \-fps Ns = Ns Ar fps
Window refresh rate. This setting is ignored on Wayland,
nsst relies on compositor callbacks to throttle rendering instead.
.It Fl \-horizontal-border Ns = Ns Ar pixels
Top and bottom internal botder width (deprecated)
.It Fl \-italic-color Ns = Ns Ar color
Special color of italic text.
.Ar Color
format is same as for
.Fl \-colorN
.It Fl \-keep-clipboard Ns = Ns Ar bool
Reuse copied clipboard content instead of current selection data
.It Fl \-keep-selection Ns = Ns Ar bool
Don't clear X11 selection when unhighlighted
.It Fl \-key-break Ns = Ns Ar key
Send break hotkey, initial value is Break
.It Fl \-key-copy Ns = Ns Ar key
Copy to clipboard hotkey, initial value is T-C
.It Fl \-key-copy-uri Ns = Ns Ar key
Copy highlighted URI to clipboard hotkey, initial value is T-U.
This is recognized only if URI support is compiled in
.It Fl \-key-paste Ns = Ns Ar key
Paste from clipboard hotkey, initial value is T-V
.It Fl \-key-dec-font Ns = Ns Ar key
Decrement font size hotkey, initial value is T-Page_Down
.It Fl \-key-inc-font Ns = Ns Ar key
Increment font size hotkey, initial value is T-Page_Up
.It Fl \-key-new-window Ns = Ns Ar key
Create new window hotkey, initial value is T-N
.It Fl \-key-numlock Ns = Ns Ar key
Application keypad mode allow toggle hotkey, initial value is T-Numlock
.It Fl \-key-reload-config Ns = Ns Ar key
Reload config hotkey, initial value is T-C
.It Fl \-key-reset Ns = Ns Ar key
Terminal reset hotkey, initial value is T-R
.It Fl \-key-reset-font Ns = Ns Ar key
Reset font size hotkey, initial value is T-Home
.It Fl \-key-reverse-video Ns = Ns Ar key
Toggle reverse video mode hotkey, initial value is T-I
.It Fl \-key-scroll-down Ns = Ns Ar key
Scroll down hotkey, initial value is T-Down
.It Fl \-key-scroll-up Ns = Ns Ar key
Scroll up hotkey, initial value is T-Up
.It Fl \-key-jump-next-cmd Ns = Ns Ar key
Scroll view to next command start, inital value is T-F
.It Fl \-key-jump-prev-cmd Ns = Ns Ar key
Scroll view to previous command start, initial value is T-B
.It Fl \-line-spacing Ns = Ns Ar pixels
Additional vertical line spacing
.It Fl \-log-level Ns = Ns Ar level
Filtering level of logged information.
.Ar level
is one of quiet, fatal, warn or info
.It Fl \-margin-bell Ns = Ns Ar value
Margin bell volume index.
Value is one of off, low or high
.It Fl \-margin-bell-high-volume Ns = Ns Ar volume
 High volume value for DECSMBV, from 0 to 100
.It Fl \-margin-bell-low-volume Ns = Ns Ar volume
Low volume value for DECSMBV, from 0 to 100
.It Fl \-override-boxdrawing Ns = Ns Ar bool
Use built-in box drawing characters.
Use this if font line drawing characters does not align or are missing
This option is recognized only if box drawing characters support is compiled in
.Ti Fl \-open-command Ns = Ns Ar path
Executable or script used to open URIs when they are clicked.
This option is recognized only if URI support is compiled in
.It Fl \-pixel-mode Ns = Ns Ar value
Subpixels arrangement. Mono disables subpixel rendering
.Ar Value
is one of mono, bgr, rgb, bgrv, rgbv.
.It Fl \-pointer-shape Ns = Ns Ar string
Default mouse pointer shape for the terminal window.
.It Fl \-uri-pointer-shape Ns = Ns Ar string
Mouse pointer shape for hovering over URIs.
.It Fl \-resize-pointer-shape Ns = Ns Ar string
Mouse pointer shape for window resizing.
.It Fl \-print-command Ns = Ns Ar path
Program to pipe CSI MC output into
.It Fl \-printer-file Ns = Ns Ar path , Fl o Ar path
File where CSI MC will output to
.It Fl \-print-attributes Ns = Ns Ar bool
Print cell attributes when auto print mode (CSI ? 5 i) is enabled
.It Fl \-quit , Fl q
Quit daemon (only for nsstc)
.It Fl \-raise-on-bell Ns = Ns Ar bool
Raise terminal window on bell
.It Fl \-reversed-color Ns = Ns Ar color
Special color of reversed text.
.Ar Color
format is same as for
.Fl \-colorN
.It Fl \-smooth-resize Ns = Ns Ar bool
Don't force window size to be aligned on character size.
.It Fl \-scroll-amount Ns = Ns Ar lines
Number of lines scrolled in a time
.It Fl \-scroll-on-input Ns = Ns Ar bool
Scroll view to bottom on key press
.It Fl \-scroll-on-output Ns = Ns Ar bool
Scroll view to bottom when character in printed
.It Fl \-scrollback-size Ns = Ns Ar lines , Fl H Ar lines
Number of saved lines in scrollback buffer
.It Fl \-select-to-clipboard Ns = Ns Ar bool
Use CLIPBOARD selection to store highlighted data
.It Fl \-selected-background Ns = Ns Ar color
Color of selected background. If unspecified uses foreground color
.Ar Color
format is same as for
.Fl \-colorN
.It Fl \-selected-foreground Ns = Ns Ar color
Color of selected text. If unspecified uses background color.
.Ar Color
format is same as for
.Fl \-colorN
.It Fl \-shell Ns = Ns Ar path
Shell to start in new instance. It differs from
.Fl e
in aspect that
.Fl e
can also contain arguments and it applies only to first terminal window.
It gets overridden by the SHELL environment variable.
.It Fl \-socket Ns = Ns Ar path , Fl s Ar path
Path for daemon socket to be created
.It Fl \-special-blink Ns = Ns Ar bool
Enable/disable blinking text special color
.It Fl \-special-bold Ns = Ns Ar bool
Enable/disable bold text special color
.It Fl \-special-italic Ns = Ns Ar bool
Enable/disable italic text special color
.It Fl \-special-reverse Ns = Ns Ar bool
Enable/disable reverse text special color
.It Fl \-special-underlined Ns = Ns Ar bool
Enable/disable underlined text special color
.It Fl \-substitute-fonts Ns = Ns Ar bool
Enable/disable substitute font support
.It Fl \-term-mod Ns = Ns Ar mods
Modifiers to which T modifier expands. If
.Ar mods
contains T it expands to CS
.It Fl \-term-name Ns = Ns Ar name , Fl D Ar name
Terminfo terminal name, initial TERM value. Default is TERM=xterm-256color
.It Fl \-title Ns = Ns Ar title , Fl T title , Fl t title
Initial window and window icon title
.It Fl \-trace-characters Ns = Ns Ar bool
Trace interpreted characters
.It Fl \-trace-controls Ns = Ns Ar bool
Trace interpreted control characters and sequences
.It Fl \-trace-events Ns = Ns Ar bool
Trace received events
.It Fl \-trace-fonts Ns = Ns Ar bool
Log font related information
.It Fl \-trace-input Ns = Ns Ar bool
Trace user input
.It Fl \-trace-misc Ns = Ns Ar bool
Trace miscellaneous information
.It Fl \-triple-click-time Ns = Ns Ar time
Time between second and third mouse pressed in which all three clicks are considered a triple click.
.It Fl \-underline-width Ns = Ns Ar pixels
Text underline width
.It Fl \-underlined-color Ns = Ns Ar color
Special color of underlined text.
.Ar Color
format is same as for
.Fl \-colorN
.It Fl \-unique-uris Ns = Ns Ar bool
Make distinction between URIs with the same location.
It consumes more memory but more precisely highlight URIs.
This option is recognized only if URI support is compiled in
.It Fl \-urgent-on-bell Ns = Ns Ar bool
Set ICCCM window urgency on bell
.It Fl \-uri-click-mod Ns = Ns Ar mods
Modifiers required to click to URIs, empty by default.
This option is recognized only if URI support is compiled in
.It Fl \-uri-mode Ns = Ns Ar mode
Set URI support mode.
.Ar mode
is one of off, manual, auto.
Auto means autodetection of URIs in input text, may slightly slow down the terminal.
Manual enables explicitly declared URIs, such as ones generated by ls.
Off disables URI rendering and handling
.It Fl \-uri-color Ns = Ns Ar color
Special color of URI text.
This option is recognized only if URI support is compiled in.
.Ar Color
format is same as for
.Fl \-colorN
.It Fl \-uri-underline-color Ns = Ns Ar color
Special color of hovered URI underline.
This option is recognized only if URI support is compiled in.
.Ar Color
format is same as for
.Fl \-colorN
.It Fl \-vertical-border Ns = Ns Ar pixels
Left and right internal border width (deprecated)
.It Fl \-left-border Ns = Ns Ar pixels
Left internal border width
.It Fl \-right-border Ns = Ns Ar pixels
Right internal border width
.It Fl \-top-border Ns = Ns Ar pixels
Top internal border width
.It Fl \-bottom-border Ns = Ns Ar pixels
Bottom internal border width
.It Fl \-border Ns = Ns Ar pixels
Internal border width. Sets top, left, right and bottom borders to the same value
.It Fl \-visual-bell Ns = Ns Ar bool
Enable/disable visual bell
.It Fl \-visual-bell-time Ns = Ns Ar time
Duration of visual bell.
.It Fl \-window-class Ns = Ns Ar class , Fl c Ar class
X11 Window class (or wayland app-id)
.It Fl \-window-ops Ns = Ns Ar bool
Allow window manipulation with escape sequences
.It Fl \-word-break Ns = Ns Ar separators
Symbols treated as word separators when snapping mouse selection
.El
.Pp
The following are advanced options that are used to alter terminal emulation behaviour.
Changing these options can break applications. Use with caution.
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl \-allow-alternate Ns = Ns Ar bool
Enable alternate screen
.It Fl \-allow-modify-edit-keypad Ns = Ns Ar bool
 Allow modifying edit keypad keys in legacy keyboard layout
.It Fl \-allow-modify-function Ns = Ns Ar bool
Allow modifying function keys in legacy keyboard layout
.It Fl \-allow-modify-keypad Ns = Ns Ar bool
Allow modifying keypad keys in legacy keyboard layout
.It Fl \-allow-modify-misc Ns = Ns Ar bool
Allow modifying miscellaneous keys in legacy keyboard layout
.It Fl \-alternate-scroll Ns = Ns Ar bool
Scrolling sends arrow keys escapes in alternate screen
.It Fl \-answerback-string Ns = Ns Ar string
<ENQ> report, default is <ACK>
.It Fl \-autorepeat Ns = Ns Ar bool
Enable keys autorepeat (DECARM)
.It Fl \-appcursor Ns = Ns Ar bool
Initial application cursor mode value.
.It Fl \-appkey Ns = Ns Ar bool
Initial application keypad mode value
.It Fl \-autowrap Ns = Ns Ar bool
Initial autowrap setting
.It Fl \-backspace-is-del Ns = Ns Ar bool
Backspace sends DEL instead of BS
.It Fl \-delete-is-del Ns = Ns Ar bool
Delete sends DEL symbol instead of escape sequence
.It Fl \-erase-scrollback Ns = Ns Ar bool
Allow ED 3 to clear scrollback buffer. This will allow applications to erase you termianl history.
.It Fl \-extended-cir Ns = Ns Ar bool
Report all SGR attributes in DECCIR. This is an extension of nsst and no applications can parse this format.
.It Fl \-fkey-increment Ns = Ns Ar number
Step in numbering function keys
.It Fl \-force-nrcs Ns = Ns Ar bool
Enable NRCS translation even when UTF-8 mode is enabled
.It Fl \-frame-wait-delay Ns = Ns Ar time
Maximal time since last application output before redraw is scheduled.
.It Fl \-has-meta Ns = Ns Ar bool
Initial
.Qq handle meta/alt modifier
mode state
.It Fl \-keyboard-dialect Ns = Ns Ar cs
National replacement character set to be used in non-UTF-8 mode for keyboard input
.Ar cs
is in format accepted by corresponding escape sequences
.It Fl \-keyboard-mapping Ns = Ns Ar mapping
Initial keyboard mapping.
.Ar Mapping
is one of default, legacy, vt220, hp, sun and sco.
More information about keyboard mappings can be found in XTerm's ctlseqs.ms
.It Fl \-lock-keyboard Ns = Ns Ar bool
Initial value of KAM
.Qq disable keyboard input
mode state
.It Fl \-luit Ns = Ns Ar bool
Launch luit if locale encoding is not supported by terminal
.It Fl \-luit-path Ns = Ns Ar path
Path to luit executable
.It Fl \-margin-bell-column Ns = Ns Ar column
Column at which margin bell rings when armed
.It Fl \-max-frame-time Ns = Ns Ar time
Maximum time between redraws. It is used to reduce flickering.
.It Fl \-meta-sends-escape Ns = Ns Ar bool
Alt/Meta sends escape prefix instead of setting 8-th bit
.It Fl \-modify-cursor Ns = Ns Ar fmt
Enable encoding modifiers for cursor keys.
.Ar fmt
0 disables reporting keys with modifiers, 1 sends \fBSS3 ...\fP sequences
2 sends \fBCSI ...\fP sequences, 3 sends \fBCSI 1; ...\fP sequences, with dummy first argument 1,
3 sends private \fBCSI > 1; ...\fP sequences.
.It Fl \-modify-function Ns = Ns Ar fmt
Enable encoding modifiers for function keys
.Ar Fmt
is same as for
.Fl \-modify-cursor
.It Fl \-modify-keypad Ns = Ns Ar fmt
Enable encoding modifiers keypad keys.
.Ar Fmt
is same as for
.Fl \-modify-cursor
.It Fl \-modify-other Ns = Ns Ar value
Enable encoding modifiers for other (non-function) keys.
0 is disable, 1 is all, excluding commonly known values, 2 is all.
.It Fl \-modify-other-fmt Ns = Ns Ar value
Format of encoding modifiers when modify other keys is enabled.
.Ar Value
is one of xterm, csi-u. xterm sends \fBCSI 27 ; M ; K ~\fP sequences.
csu-u sends \fBCSI K ; M u\fP sequences. M is decimal modifier mask. K is pressed key code.
.It Fl \-nrcs Ns = Ns Ar bool
Initial value of
.Qq enable NRCSs support
mode state
.It Fl \-numlock Ns = Ns Ar bool
Initial value of
.Qq allow numlock
mode state
.It Fl \-reverse-video Ns = Ns Ar bool
Initial reverse video setting
.It Fl \-smooth-scroll-delay Ns = Ns Ar time
Delay between subsequent scrolls when smooth scroll mode is enabled
.It Fl \-smooth-scroll-step Ns = Ns Ar lines
Maximal amount of lines to be scrolled without delay when smooth scroll mode is enabled
.It Fl \-smooth-scroll Ns = Ns Ar bool
Initial smooth scroll setting
.It Fl \-sync-timeout Ns = Ns Ar time
Synchronous update timeout
.It Fl \-tab-width Ns = Ns Ar width
Initial width of tab character, default is 8
.It Fl \-use-utf8 Ns = Ns Ar bool
Enable UTF-8 mode. Enabled by default if current locale encoding is UTF-8
.It Fl \-vt-version Ns = Ns Ar version , Fl V Ar version
Emulated DEC VT version, e.g. 520
.It Fl \-wait-for-configure-delay Ns = Ns Ar time
Maximum delay to wait for configure delay after window resize
.El

.Sh AUTHORS
Evgeniy Baskov <j-basevgser@yandex.ru>
